docs: explain the security-status command output (#2109)
canonical/ubuntu-advantage-client: docs/explanations/how_to_interpret_the_security_status_command.md

# How to interpret the security-status command output

The `security-status` command is used to get an overview
of the packages installed in your machine. Currently,
the command only support machine readable output: `json` or `yaml`.

If you run the `ua security-status --format yaml` command on your
machine, you are expected to see the output following this structure:

```
_schema_version: '0.1'
summary:
  num_esm_apps_packages: 0
  num_esm_apps_updates: 0
  num_esm_infra_packages: 1
  num_esm_infra_updates: 1
  num_main_packages: 70
  num_multiverse_packages: 10
  num_restricted_packages: 10
  num_third_party_packages: 0
  num_universe_packages: 9
  num_installed_packages: 100
  num_standard_security_updates: 0
  ua:
    attached: true
    enabled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
    entitled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
packages:
- origin: esm.ubuntu.com
  package: zlib1g
  service_name: esm-infra
  status: upgrade_available
  version: 1:1.2.8.dfsg-2ubuntu4.3+esm1
```

Let's understand what each key mean on the output of the `ua security-status` command:

> * **summary**: The summary of the system related to Ubuntu Advantage (UA) and

Reviewer: A suggestion to consider, not sure if it would be significantly better

We could make field names inline code + bold like

```
**`summary`**
```
rendered:
**`summary`**

  the different package sources in the system:

  * **num_esm_apps_packages**: The number of packages installed from `esm-apps`.
  * **num_esm_apps_updates**: The number of `esm-apps` package updates available in the system.
  * **num_esm_infra_packages**:  The number of packages installed from `esm-infra`.
  * **num_esm_infra_updates**: The number of `esm-infra` package updates available in the system.

>   * **num_installed_packages**: The number of installed packages in the system.

Reviewer: I suggest moving this field to the top. I don't think the order needs to match the actual output - I'd rather focus on an intuitive order for explanation.

And suggest emphasis that this is the total
```suggestion
  * **num_installed_packages**: The total number of installed packages in the system.
```

Reviewer: why does github keep duplicating my comments :cry:

  * **num_main_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `main` archive component.
  * **num_multiverse_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `multiverse` archive
    component.
  * **num_restricted_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `restricted` archive
    component.
  * **num_third_party_packages**: The number of packages installed from `third party` sources.
  * **num_universe_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `universe` archive
    component.
  * **num_unknown_packages**: The number of packages installed from sources not known to `apt`
    (installed locally through dpkg or packages without a remote reference).
  * **num_standard_security_updates**: The number of standard security updates available in the system.

>   It is worth mentioning here that the updates count are verifying the number of **security**

Reviewer: nit suggestion
```suggestion
  It is worth mentioning here that the `*_updates` fields are presenting the number of **security**
```

>   It is worth mentioning here that the updates count are verifying the number of **security**

Reviewer: nit suggestion
```suggestion
  It is worth mentioning here that the `*_updates` fields are presenting the number of **security**
```

Reviewer: another dupe

  updates for **installed** packages. For example, let's assume your machine has a universe package that
  has a security update from `esm-infra`. The count will be displayed as:

  ```
  num_esm_infra_packages: 0
  num_esm_infra_updates: 1
  num_universe_packages: 1
  ```

  After upgrading the system, the count will turn to:

  ```
  num_esm_infra_packages: 1
  num_esm_infra_updates: 0
  num_universe_packages: 0
  ```

  * **ua**: An object representing the state of UA on the system:
    * **attached**: If the system is attached to a UA subscription.
    * **enabled_services**: A list of services that are enabled on the system. If unattached, this
      will always be an empty list.
    * **entitled_services**: A list of services that are entitled on your UA subscription. If
      unattached, this will always be an empty list.

> * **packages**: A list of updates for security packages installed in the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **packages**: A list of security updates for packages installed in the system.
```

  Every entry on the list will follow this structure:

  * **origin**: The host were the update comes from.
  * **package**: The name of the package.
  * **service_name**: The service that provides that package update. It can be either: `esm-infra`,
    `esm-apps` or `standard-security`.
  * **status**: The status for this update. It will be one of:

>     * **upgrade_available**: The package can be upgraded right now.

Reviewer: Since these are string values, I think we should include quotes too
```suggestion
    * **"upgrade_available"**: The package can be upgraded right now.
```
and maybe with backticks too?
```suggestion
    * **`"upgrade_available"`**: The package can be upgraded right now.
```

    * **"pending_attach"**: The package needs a UA subscription attached to be upgraded.
    * **"pending_enable"**: The machine is attached to a UA subscription, but the service required to
      provide the upgrade is not enabled.

>     * **"upgrade_unavailable"**: The are no upgrades available for that package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **"upgrade_unavailable"**: The machine is attached, but the contract is not entitled to the service which provides the upgrade.
```

>   * **`version`**: The package version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **`version`**: The update version.
```

# How to interpret the security-status command output

The `security-status` command is used to get an overview
of the packages installed in your machine. Currently,
the command only support machine readable output: `json` or `yaml`.

If you run the `ua security-status --format yaml` command on your
machine, you are expected to see the output following this structure:

```
_schema_version: '0.1'
summary:
  num_esm_apps_packages: 0
  num_esm_apps_updates: 0
  num_esm_infra_packages: 1
  num_esm_infra_updates: 1
  num_main_packages: 70
  num_multiverse_packages: 10
  num_restricted_packages: 10
  num_third_party_packages: 0
  num_universe_packages: 9
  num_installed_packages: 100
  num_standard_security_updates: 0
  ua:
    attached: true
    enabled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
    entitled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
packages:
- origin: esm.ubuntu.com
  package: zlib1g
  service_name: esm-infra
  status: upgrade_available
  version: 1:1.2.8.dfsg-2ubuntu4.3+esm1
```

Let's understand what each key mean on the output of the `ua security-status` command:

> * **summary**: The summary of the system related to Ubuntu Advantage (UA) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`summary`**: The summary of the system related to Ubuntu Advantage (UA) and
```

The `security-status` command is used to get an overview
of the packages installed in your machine. Currently,
the command only support machine readable output: `json` or `yaml`.

If you run the `ua security-status --format yaml` command on your
machine, you are expected to see the output following this structure:

```
_schema_version: '0.1'
summary:
  num_esm_apps_packages: 0
  num_esm_apps_updates: 0
  num_esm_infra_packages: 1
  num_esm_infra_updates: 1
  num_main_packages: 70
  num_multiverse_packages: 10
  num_restricted_packages: 10
  num_third_party_packages: 0
  num_universe_packages: 9
  num_installed_packages: 100
  num_standard_security_updates: 0
  ua:
    attached: true
    enabled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
    entitled_services:
    - esm-apps
    - esm-infra
packages:
- origin: esm.ubuntu.com
  package: zlib1g
  service_name: esm-infra
  status: upgrade_available
  version: 1:1.2.8.dfsg-2ubuntu4.3+esm1
```

Let's understand what each key mean on the output of the `ua security-status` command:

* **summary**: The summary of the system related to Ubuntu Advantage (UA) and
  the different package sources in the system:

>   * **num_esm_apps_packages**: The number of `esm-apps` packages installed in the system.

Reviewer 2: Overall, I would add a paragraph stating that all keys ending in `_packages` are counts for the **installed** packages, and all keys ending in `_updates` are counts of newer versions of installed packages, obtained(obtainable) from a security pocket (archive, or ESM).
As an example (which can go in the document, as is or more complete, if you think it is relevant): some package may be from `universe`, and have a security update available at `esm-apps`. So, if you would count it:
- before upgrading:
```
num_esm_apps_packages: 0
num_esm_apps_updates: 1
num_universe_packages: 1

```
- after upgrading:
```
num_esm_apps_packages: 1
num_esm_apps_updates: 0
num_universe_packages: 0
```

  * **num_esm_apps_updates**: The number of `esm-apps` package updates available in the system.

>   * **num_esm_infra_packages**: The number of `esm-infra` packages installed in the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **num_esm_infra_packages**: The number of packages installed from `esm-infra`.
```

for consistency, same for Apps

  * **num_esm_infra_updates**: The number of `esm-infra` package updates available in the system.
  * **num_installed_packages**: The number of installed packages in the system.

>   * **num_main_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `main` source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **num_main_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `main` archive component.
```

Reviewer 2: same for the subsequent

Author: I just left `third party` and `unknows` using source still

  * **num_multiverse_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `multiverse` source.
  * **num_restricted_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `restricted` source.
  * **num_third_party_packages**: The number of packages installed from `third party` sources.
  * **num_universe_packages**: The number of packages installed from the `universe` source.

>   * **num_unknown_packages**: The number of packages installed from an unknown source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **num_unknown_packages**: The number of packages installed from sources not known to `apt` (installed locally through dpkg, or packages without a remote reference)
```

>   * **num_standard_security_updates**: The number of packages installed from the `security` source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **num_standard_security_updates**: The number of standard security updates available in the system.
```

  * **ua**: An object representing the state of UA on the system:
    * **attached**: If the system is attached to a UA subscription.
    * **enabled_services**: A list of services that are enabled on the system. If unattached, this
      will always be an empty list.
    * **entitled_services**: A list of services that are entitled on your UA subscription. If
      unattached, this will always be an empty list.

> * **packages**: A list of security packages installed in the system. Every entry on the list will

Reviewer 2: And we had evidence today that people got confused about it :/

> * **packages**: A list of security packages installed in the system. Every entry on the list will

Reviewer: Yeah I think we're on the same page about changing the key name. We had just decided to wait until we get versioning with the new api structure before we make key name changes.

  follow this structure:

>   * **origin**: The host were the package comes from.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **origin**: The host were the update comes from.
```

  * **package**: The name of the package.

>   * **service_name**: The service that provides that package. It can be either: `esm-infra`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **service_name**: The service that provides that package update. It can be either: `esm-infra`,
```

    `esm-apps` or `standard-security`.

>   * **status**: The upgrade status of that package. It can be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **status**: The status for this update. It will be one of:
```

    * **upgrade_available**: The package can be upgraded right now.

>     * **pending_attach**: The package needs a UA service to be upgraded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **pending_attach**: The package needs a UA subscription attached to be upgraded.
```

    * **pending_enable**: The machine is attached to a UA subscription, but the service required to
      provide the upgrade is not enabled.

>     * **upgrade_unavailable**: The are no upgrades available for that package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **upgrade_unavailable**: The machine is attached, but there contract is not entitled to the service which provides the upgrade.
```

>   * **version**: The package version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **version**: The update version.
```
